the following content is provided under a Creative Commons license
your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer
high-quality educational resources for free
to make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of them IT
courses
visit MIT OpenCourseWare at 0 CW
that MIT that EDU home in
the
the in
the menu
are
for last time we
introduce the notion that mapping continuous-time filters to discrete-time
filters and we developed in Polson variance as
one useful technique for carrying out that type mapping
but I'd like to do in this lecture
is illustrate in Polson variants as a design procedure
in the context so one specific
class all filters namely Butterworth filters
and in then following that will proceed on to discuss
another very important and useful mapping or design procedure referred to
as the by linear transformation
so to begin let me
just discuss briefly what the class a Butterworth
filters is and specifically
the Butterworth filters are the fine
through their frequency response a transfer function and I'm
using capital be to denote a Butterworth filter
and by definition the magnitude square to the frequency responsible Butterworth
filter
is given by this expression and for example
if and more equal to 1 then this would simply
correspond to the magnitude squared love the frequency response
for a first order differential equation now if you
look at the frequency response be a filmmaker
for this class the filters
I've illustrated that below and
what we see is that
the frequency response starts at Unity
because that's that's the way that its normalized and it has
a monatomic characteristic in the past band and the stop and
at a frequency equal to the pram inner Omega subsea
up here which is referred to as the cutoff frequency
the Butterworth filter frequency response
always goes through the same point namely point 707
and as the order the Butterworth filter capital and
increases the transition
from the passband to the stop band
becomes sharper and sharper so for higher-order filters then
the frequency response is flattering the passband
and drops of more quickly and attenuates more
in this topic now
in designing Butterworth filters what we
we want to look at is the location at the polls
all the system function and
we can in for those from our definition
I'll what the frequency response for the Butterworth filter is
in particular we have this expression
for the magnitude squared the frequency response
and we recognize that of course as
be love J Omega times be
love minus J Omega that's what the magnitude squared
will be equal to and in order to convert this
to an expression describing the system function or in terms that the
more general applause transform variable ass
well we recognize is dead J Omega
in the more general setting simply corresponds to
the applause transform variable s so
this product in fact
is the applause transform for st. go to jail make a
more generally then this is the result of evaluating
be a vast eyes be a minus S&S equals J Omega
consequently comparing this expression
with this statement leads us to the conclusion
dead the transfer function be a badass
the Butterworth filter times be off minus s
is given by the expression that I indicate here
simply replacing J Omega by S
now what we want to look at are the holes
all be a vast that's what we'll want to get as we
design a Butterworth filter and
we can recognize the polls love this product
simply by looking at the roots at the denominator polynomial
and those roots are just taking a counter this factor 2n
those routes are at J Omega subsea
times the 2n roots I'll
-1 those roots in fact all I on a circle
an the consequences that is that
the holes all this expression
are on a circle the circle
is radius omega-6 see and the polls are distributed
around the circle so here I demonstrated
the polls love be a vast size be at minus s
for the specific case for capital and is equal to 3 so there are a total of six
polls
around the circle and
then for this specific case the polls a space by
sixty degrees now we have PSA's be at minus s
to get the system function for the Butterworth filter we'd like to get
BFS and the question now is how do we get that
well the thing to recognize is dead wherever
this factor has a route
this factor has to have a root at
the negative location so in fact when we look at these polls we compare them
with this for example associated with be a badass
this associated with the at minus s and
likewise we compare these two together likewise we compare these two together
and so we can extract the evas from this product
simply by taking one poll at a beach those pairs
now a question of course is I did each pair which one do we associate with BFS
wish to associate with the minus says
and the answer drops out fairly simply
if we recognize dead if
we want to design filters that are stable
then be a vast the transfer function that we're designing
must have all its polls in the left after the S play
so in fact we would associate outta each of these pairs
we would associate the left airplane poll with the evas
and so the transfer function
for the Butterworth filter for this particular case where the parameter
where this designates the parameter Omega subsea
capital and his three namely a third order Butterworth filter
is this center pole locations given those
of course we can figure out simply throughout your break means
what the transfer function be a veces
alright so that's what in Butterworth filters are in now
what I'd like to do is talk about
the design or additional Butterworth filter
using the design technique that we introduced last time namely in polls and
variance
and the context in which I will
phrase the design is the context
love mapping a
continuous-time signal to a discrete-time signal
carrying out filtering using the discrete-time
go to that we're designing and then mapping back so
we're talking about now a discrete-time filter
that we want to designed to impose severe in variance from
Butterworth filters from continues time Butterworth filters
and we're going to get our design specifications
in the context loved having
considered discrete-time processing of continuous-time signals
where we will map from
a continuous-time signal to a sequence
carry out the filtering with the discrete-time filter
that we're going to design and then
we will take the resulting filtered output
and map it back to the continuous-time signals
but this discrete-time filter is
the one that we're talking about designing and
for choice a parameter there's a sampling frequency of course involved in
this process
and the value that I'll pick for the sampling frequency
is 10 killers
okay all fairly straightforward so far
and so since we have a
sampling rate of 10 killer hurts we
want to first look at our specifications
on the desired continuous type filter
and then mapped those to appropriate
specifications on the discrete I told
and what I'll pick for the
desired specifications on the continuous-time filter
is that at
one kilohertz I will ask
that the continuous-time frequency response
be down by no more then 1db
in comparison with its value at Omega equal 0
so that in effect specifies the behavior in the past band
for the specifications on the passband and
for the stop band specify dead
the filter is down by 15 DB
by the time we've gotten to one-and-a-half kilohertz
so we have in essentially the beginning of the transition band the end of the
past and it won't kill hurts
and the beginning at the stop and at one point five killer hurts
and since we're talking about designing
a Butterworth filter we know that the Butterworth filter is
monatomic in the past and stop and and so
will have a filter specification
something is a show here this represents
the allowable passband tolerance
this is the allowable stop and tolerance
and if I can draw this without
getting myself into trouble a sexually were looking for a filter then
then always stays between
the specified boundaries
here
now what we have to figure out is what the corresponding specifications
are for the digital filter in the strategy let me emphasize
is dead we have
situation where we're doing continuous-time and discrete-time
processing continuous-time signals
and we have specifications associated with that
that imposes specifications on our discrete-time
filter and then we wanted design
the discrete-time filter using impose invariance
and that's the discrete I feel to their will use the overall system
right now we want specifications
on the discrete-time filter
and we want the continuous overall equivalent system
to have certain arm
meet certain specifications a certain frequencies related to
continuous-time frequencies recall
that when we sample a continuous-time signal
is a very specific mapping from the continuous-time
frequency axis to the discrete-time frequency axis
in particular the sampling frequency
gets mapped to to Part II
well that means there are other critical frequencies get mapped
in proportion to that so one killer hurts which is a 10
love the sampling frequency with then
convert to a discrete-time frequency love point2 pie
and one-and-a-half kilohertz will convert to
a discreet I frequency love point three pie
so what this says is that for the discrete-time
filter we would like
the same behavior
but at frequencies are the same specifications
but at frequencies normalize
to the discrete-time frequency axis
that means dead we want the discrete-time
frequency Mac frequency response magnitude
to be greater than or equal to -1 DB at
two-tenths pie corresponding to the one killer hurts and continuous-time
and four the beginning
love this top band in that would occur at point three pie
at which point we want this less than or equal to minus 15
so those are our discreet I specifications
and we now wanted design the
discrete-time filter using impulse and parents
now in the polls in variance as you recall
it corresponds to
sampling generating an impulse response which is a sampled
version love the continuous-time impulse response
and there is a temptation naturally
to think love this parameter capital T
as necessarily identical
to the sampling
in the system in which the filter is going to be use
now this is a fairly subtle complicated tongue twisting issue
but the bottom line on at the essential point
is that the parameter capital T that we use in imposing variant
design as a totally different unrelated
and in fact as it turns out arbitrary parameter
which is not necessarilly pegged
to the sampling frequency and I think it would be difficult for me to totally
clarify that
during the lecture it's discussed more the book
and certainly you should take plenty of time to reflect on
for it but let's no look then
at where we are in our design procedure
and specifically what it is that we need to do
in order to design the digital
Butterworth filter now we have
a set of specifications there we
we've generated relating essentially to
how we want the passband if the digital filter
and the stop and above the digital filter to behave
course since this isn't an ideal filter
it has sound transitions from passband to stop and
and as we discussed last time there is
aliasing which we need to at least beware oath
we specified certain frequencies along this axis
which are easily converted by
relating the the two axes through this mapping
are you easily related back to
the continuous-time
frequency axis as we have here
and in particular now if we
word is simply pick that parameter in the imposing variant design capital T
as equal to unity and I indicated just a minute ago that we can pick it
arbitrarily
if I a pic is unity then the procedure which consists
about designing the continuous-time Butterworth filter
with meeting the pro or exceeding the appropriate specifications
and then going through the imposing variant procedure
alright so let's do that then
we want the discrete-time impulse response to be the continuous-time
paul's response sampled and for convenience I'm going to pick this
parameter capital T equal to 1
that means dead the frequency normalization between
the discrete-time frequency axis and the continuous-time
frequency axis in fact is
those axes are scaled identically because
capital T is equal to 1 and so now
we want the analog for continuous-time
specifications and so what we need to do then
is design a Butterworth filter I'm using capital be here again to denote
the frequency response the Butterworth filter the Butterworth filter
to have a magnitude which is greater than or equal to -1 DB
prior to the frequency 0.2 pie
and less than or equal to -15 at a frequency
beyond 0.3 part
and so now what we need to do is determine
capital and and Omega subsea
in order to meet or exceed the specifications
now if you go through The Associated algebra doing at let's say that
you decide that you want a pic capital and omega-6
see to exactly meet those inequalities at
the to frequencies point to point point three pie
what you'll find after going through the algebra
is that there exactly Matt
if capital and is 5.88
and omega-6 see is point 7047
and this obviously can't
is in satisfactory as parameters for the Butterworth filter
why is that the reason is
that capital and isn't an integer and in
the class a Butterworth filters to generate a rational transfer function
capital N this parameter must be an integer
so since it can't be 5.88
the natural thing to do is to move it up
to the next closest integer namely 6
and that means that will end up with a filter that goes even better
in the specifications on the other hand
there's something kinda underneath the surface
dead is inherent in the impulsive area design procedure
namely the fact dad there will always be some aliasing
so one strategy and a natural one often
imposing variant design is to
shoes and as the next highest integer as I've done
and then shoes the parameter omega-6 see
so that the passband specifications
are exactly met and the stop and specifications are then slightly
exceeded
and that will leave some margin for releasing
right now continuing this example then
how would we complete the design
well we know what are two parameters
capital and and omega-6
CR in that means that we can determine BFS
times be at minus s those polls are located
on a circle in the complex s plane
and the polls on that circle are paired
Sat some being associated with BFS and some would be a minus s
and in particular to determined be a badass
we would simply take the polls
on the portion of the circle it's in the left after the S
point now
with active service is a
butterworth continuous-time filter
which we're then mapping to impose invariance
with capital T equal to 1 to
a discrete-time filter that discrete-time filter
to be used in a system
which has disassociated sampling frequency
which is 10 killer hurts
so to get the discrete-time filter then
we first determine be a vast as we just did
or at least they indicated how to do it
we would then expand that out in a partial fraction expansion
and then apply the imposing variant procedure
which consists love mapping the polls
in the S plane to polls in the seaplane at locations either the s2k
capital T your capital T is equal to 1
and retaining the residue where the coefficients
in the expansion and this ban
will give us the transfer function for the discrete-time
filter so
if in fact we
did at than the resulting frequency response
that we would get is what i've indicated here
and I indicated first on a magnitude
scale linear magnitude scale and second
on a like a rhythmic scale and
as we had originally specified the digital filter
is supposed to be greater than a recall to
-1 dB at point to pie and less than or equal to -15
the be at point three pie
and in fact this slightly exceeds the specifications
since we had purposely allowed some margin
in this topic
now this is an illustration of the impulse invariant procedure
and it has a number very nice properties one of which is that
it takes a continuous-time filter frequency response
and it converts it to a discrete-time frequency response which
in the absence Bailey is saying looks identical except for linear frequency
scale change and in fact we pick capital T equal to one in there is no scale
change
it has the major disadvantage
dead there is always daily as saying and for some
design for some problems for example if the filter we're trying to design
is not ban limited or low pass
then the alias saying will actually become intolerable
well there's another design procedure which I now want to introduce
which totally avoids the problems have aliasing
but obviously then has its own costs associated with
and that procedure is referred to as
the by linear transformation
the by linear transformation which our own
try to drive here in any detail
is a mapping love continuous-time filters
to discrete-time filters corresponding
to taking the applause transform variable ass
in the continuous-time filter and replacing it
by what is referred to as a file in your function at z
and so if I substitute this in here
that will give me the discrete-time frequency response
again in this procedure there's a primer capital T
which again is totally irrelevant given the approach that we're taking
and which we will generally tend to normalize out to unity
and let me just say quickly and passing
dead although we all go through this the
notion of the by linear transformation
can be tied to the concept love
taking the differential equation for the continuous-time
filter converting it to an integral equation by integrating
enough times on both sides
and then converting Matt to
a difference equation by approximating
the integrals with the trapezoidal rule
and that in effect will correspond
to mapping the continuous-time filter to a discrete-time
filter with the by linear transformation well we'll just focus on
the properties love the mapping and in particular
if we were to substitute into
the expression see equal to you DJ Omega corresponding to the unit circle
we would find dead the unit circle
in discrete-time corresponds to mapping
DJ Omega axis in continuous-time which is exactly
what we want now the mapping
between the continuous-time frequency
and the discrete-time frequency
is a nonlinear mapping which
is given by the algebraic expression that I indicate here
and if we plot this mapping
but we have is this Kurt
and what this corresponds to then
is a mapping cause the J Omega axis or continuous time-frequency
to discrete-time frequency
and if we think more generally oath the mapping represented by the by a linear
transformation
in the context of the S plane in the seaplane
it corresponds to mapping
DJ Omega axis in the S plane
to what's around the unit circle in the seaplane
and you can also convince yourself
that the left after the S plane maps
to the inside the unit circle and
so that means dead stable
continuous-time filters will always map to stable
discrete-time filters which is exactly what we desire
now notice in this that there's no issue avail yes and what's happened is
that we've replaced espy function FZ corresponds to
mapping BS point too busy playing fact the whole J Omega axes
has mapped to once around the unit circle
which obviously requires some type of nonlinear mapping because
like the jamming axis is infinitely long
the unit circle has a fine I radius
and so essentially what has to happen is if you think
love walking along the continuous-time
frequency axis and simultaneously walking around the unit circle
if you walk at a constant rate around the unit circle
and your simultaneously walking up the jam a axis
if you want to get around the pie by the time
here you've gotten tune infinity along
the continuous-time frequency axis you better
wats kittens are walking faster faster faster because you've got
an infinite distance to cover while you just go over a finite distance here
well worldwide says really is that
that's why in fact we're taking
the entire or were able to take the entire
Omega axis and just map it into an interval
all above link pie
right now that means that their
is a nonlinear distortion of the frequency axis
if we were to take a continuous I filter and converted to
a discrete type filter with the by a linear transformation
how do we account for that were for that matter
when can we really use it and
we can see how to had a both take account of it
and what its limitations are by
recognizing the following suppose that
I wanted design a
discretized salter and
what is going to happen is that it will be mapped to a continuous-time filter
the relationship between
the two frequency axes will be given by this Kurt
so let's supposed dead the
continuous-time frequency response looks as I've shown here
with a passband cutoff frequency and its top and cut-off frequency
if this were mapped
through the by a linear transformation to
a discrete-time filter then this cutoff frequency
would fall over here
which is related through this curve and
this cutoff frequency to stop and age
would be here again reflected it's these frequencies reflected
through this skirt
so let's suppose now that what I'd like to do is design
a discrete-time filter where the discrete-time filter has
certain frequency specifications
which is what are previous example has
it has let's say a specified stop and age
as specified past bandage and assess specified stop and age
the design procedure within correspond to
mapping those frequencies
to the corresponding continuous-time frequencies
designing the continuous-time filter
to me this specification space
on those critical frequencies
then taking the continuous-time design
and mapping it back to a discrete I filter
through the by linear transformation
right now what we want to do is
again map a Butterworth filter continuous-time Butterworth filter to
to a digital filter in such a way that the digital filter approximately
meets the specifications that we had before
and let me just remind you love where we were
the critical frequencies were at 0.2 pie
and 0.3 pie and
what we had asked for is dead the frequency response
be down by no more than one dB
up 2.2 pie and down by
at least 15 TV at Point three-part
so we want to design the same
discrete-time filter as we did before with imposing variance
we now want to do it with the by linear transformation
applied to an appropriate butterworth design
okay well so let's see what kinda specifications we have
we know that the frequency the critical frequencies are mapped
through this curve for this equation
and I indicated again that this parameter capital T is
arbitrary in the design procedure
that may seem confusing initially but
this some further discussion of it in the book and it's true an important to
sort out
so we're going to pick capital T equal to unity
and that means then that the
corresponding critical frequencies
all the continuous-time filter
are at twice but ancient love
0.2 pie over to and twice the tangent
love 0.3 pie over to
so that means then there the specifications on
our continuous-time filter
are given by this sensually
past fans stop and edges warped through
that nonlinear curve this nonlinear curve
and I'm using capital G here to denote
the system function for the
resulting continuous-time salter
and so now we could think of designing a Butterworth filter
that lets say exactly meets the specifications
well if you do that what you'll find is dead
you get exact a quality
here if you pick capital N
equal to 5.3
and again we have the issue that
if we want to meet or exceed the specifications we can't make
the filter order lower we have to make it higher and so
we would make it is so to 5.3 with make the filter order equal to 6
and now again we have several
options and trade-offs before with imposing variance
we essentially decided to meet the
passband specifications and exceed the stop and specifications
to provide some margin for aliasing
here we don't have any a leasing
and we can't ratings of any way we'd like
the way that are chosen to do it is to
exactly me the
stop and cut off and exceed
the passband specifications and
the result to doing that is to choose
a filter order capital and equal to 6%
and though parameter Omega subsea in the Butterworth filter
is given by 0.7 6622
alright so now we have
the parameters for
the continuous-time Butterworth filter
which when mapped to
the discrete-time filter through the by linear transformation
will exceed our requirements in the past band and Justin
just me the stop and cut off and so
now we want to complete the design procedure and
given the parameters
up the Butterworth filter we can draw
are appropriate circle in the S plane which happens to be the same circle as
before
but with a different radius and
then associate polls on this circle
with be a bass and be a minus s in particular take the ones in the left
after the S plane
same ones we had before except we have a different value for Omega subsea
in and does then represent
BFS so we can now determine be a badass
and new ones we have the transfer function be a badass
we then map that to a
discrete-time filter by mapping through
the by linear transformation and that then
is the design procedure through
which we would follow for this example by well let's just see what
the result looks like when we're done
here I show again on both
a linear magnitude scale in on
a logarithmic good DB scale the frequency response
love the resulting filter and recall that the specifications were dead 8.2
pie
we should be down by no more than 1d being clearly we've exceeded that
considerably
and 8.3 pie we should be
are down by at least 15 DB and we chose the design so that we would exactly
meet that edge so we've met this point
and exceeded this point and this is our Design
now let's just compare this
with the impulse invariant design that we saw
a few minutes ago
and the impossibility and design is
what I indicate here be
by linear transformation design is
now overlaid on top of that
it's hard to see much difference on a linear
magnitude scale but let's look online horrific scale
and this one that I'm lifting is the by linear transformation
and this is imposing variance
and notice in fact something very interesting
which is dead the sold the
filter dead we obtained by
mapping the Butterworth filter to a digital filter through the by a linear
transformation
in fact falls off in frequency
much more rapidly then the one that we got through imposing variance
the question is why now one thought that might come to mind is well we possibly
Reince as a leasing by linear transformation doesn't have a leasing
that must be a consequence a daily as saying
in fact that's not the reason aliasing as it turns out in this particular
design is raw
was relatively minimal in the opossum variant design
the reason has to do with
is nonlinear mapping in the by a linear transformation
from the continuous-time frequency to the discrete-time frequency
keep in mind dead through then mapping
as you start walking around the unit circle and moving up the Chi Omega axis
as you move up the jam make access you have to move faster faster faster faster
and what's in continuous-time frequency and infinity
is what you get to in a discrete-time frequency by the time you get around the
park
so in fact what we're looking at is
as as we look out along this frequency axis
is we're seeing
higher and higher and higher frequencies in the continuous-time
filter by the time we get the pie
we should in fact be in the continuous-time goals are equivalent Lee
off to infinity which sounds like pretty uncomfortable place to be
okay now this was a a fairly
rapid trip through a number of issues
i in particular some the issues associated with the filing your
transformation
and and also this issue
love how you pick this parameter capital T and how it might be associated with
the
sampling frequency if you doing discrete-time processing
a continuous-time signals and we don't have time
to explore summer those issues more fully
in this lecture but in I'd like to conclude by making a
couple comments 1 comment is there the
two techniques that we've talked about impulse and Berrien center by linear
transformation
are the two techniques that are principally
used when one thinks mapping
continuous type filters to discrete-time
filters for whatever application and I stress again
that you may want to do that mapping whether or not
the discrete-time filter is eventually going to be used for processing
continuous-time signals
now imposing variants
have a characteristic dead it very nice characteristic that are
that it corresponds to a linear mapping between the two frequency axes
except for the issue with aliasing
and that's a problem with that and in particular limits its usefulness
to filter designs or for mapping continuous-time
filters their band limited
on the other hand we have the by linear transformation as a design procedure
which totally avoid daily as saying
but has the disadvantage or difficulty
better represents a nonlinear mapping from the continuous type filter
to the discrete-time filter now this nonlinear distortion
is perfectly acceptable if we're designing
or attempting to designed filters that have flack frequency characteristics
it's not acceptable if for example we had a linear frequency characteristic
that we wanted to map to discreet I filter and end up with a linear
frequency characteristic
it won't come out to be linear because all
this nonlinear mapping at the frequency axis
now in there are also
a number of other design procedures which we won't go into
for designing discrete-time filters and among them
are a variety of techniques including for example
computer-aided design procedures and I invite you
if you're interested and want to dig into that
in more detail and more deeply to
explore that topic by making reference to
various love the books listed in the bibliography
in the text thank you